Article/consumer privacy regulations ccpa and gdpr (#179)
rootstrap/blog: content/Consumer Privacy Regulations CCPA and GDPR - Pablo Blanco.md

# GDPR and CCPA Compliance for Dummies

_[Pablo Blanco](https://www.rootstrap.com/blog/author/pabloblancorootstrapcom/)
is a Full-Stack developer on the Rootstrap team and writes about his experience
with ethical hacking and information security. You can also follow Pablo on
[LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/pablo-blanco-a6b5a371/)._

![Data privacy](images/internet-privacy.jpg)

California is considered the world’s 5th biggest economy, ranking higher than
some European countries. This is not a surprise as it's home to

> Silicon Valley, the world’s premier innovation hub and headquarters of several multiple tech giants.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Silicon Valley, the world’s premier innovation hub and headquarters of multiple tech giants.
```

Given the numerous data breaches and inappropriate use of customer’s information for
targeted advertising,

> there is growing public concern regardung the misuse of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
there is growing public concern regarding the misuse of
```

becoming a primary element in any data security conversation. In the case of
the Union GDPR (2018),  Brazilian LGPD (2020), and the California Consumer
Privacy Act (2020), the ability to protect personal information is a top priority. 
For companies that base their operations around customer data, trust becomes an
essential part of their business model.

In this article, we will explore some concepts of California's
Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA), similarities and differences between CCPA and GDPR
regulations, and the impacts generated by these regulations.

## CCPA Overview

While the GDPR was created to protect citizens of the EU,
CCPA is an outcome of the GDPR, changing government priorities, and making them
more willing to protect individual privacy. Although the CCPA is relatively new,
it’s important to be aware of the
policies and processes necessary for compliance, and
the future impact it will have in comparison to GDPR.

This California state law establishes new consumer rights relating to the access
of personal information that is held by businesses. The meaning of Personal
information is quite broad, the definition given in
[CCPA](https://oag.ca.gov/privacy/) says:

> _Personal information is information that identifies, relates to, or could

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Personal information is information that identifies, relates to, or could
```

reasonably be linked with an individual or household._

Some examples of that are customer personal and private information,
internet browsing history,
 geolocation data, fingerprints, IP addresses, etc.
Personal information does not include 
available information from federal, state, or local government records.

Businesses have a track record of using personal information to benefit their
agenda and the CCPA  serves to protect California consumer rights and encourage
stronger privacy, traceability, and transparency. The CCPA allows
consumers to have control, ownership, and gain security over their personal

> information.  They also allow for the request that any business disclose

Reviewer: ```suggestion
information.  They also allow for the request that any business disclose,
```

> information.  They also allow for the request that any business disclose

Reviewer: ```suggestion
information. They also allow for the request that any business disclose
```

> , and if necessary, delete any personal information collected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and if necessary, delete any personal information collected.
```

This data protection gives consumers the right to:

- Know what personal information is collected.
- Access to and the option to delete any necessary personal information.
- Knowledge of who their personal information is being shared with
  and the option to deny such access.
- Have equal service, price,
and privacy rights (right to non-discrimination).

> It’s should also be noted that it is illegal to sell personal information of any consumers aged 13–16.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It should also be noted that it is illegal to sell personal information of any consumers aged 13–16.
```

  at least 50,000 consumers, homes, or devices for commercial purposes.
- Companies that derive 50% or more of their annual revenue from the sale of
  personal information.

## CCPA vs GDPR: What are the differences?

The European General Data Protection Regulation is an evolution of the EU’s
existing data rules and replaced the Data Protection Directive (DPD). It
addresses many of the weaknesses in the DPD, including adding requirements for
documenting IT procedures, performing risk assessments under certain conditions,
notifying the consumer and authorities when there is a breach, and strengthening
rules for data minimization.

The GDPR protects similar private data as the CCPA recommends that companies
provide a “reasonable” level of protection for personal information. It also
mandates that the business explains to the customer how their information will
be used and to explicitly ask for their permission to collect and process it.

No matter how influenced the CCPA may have been by the GDPR, there are some
clear differences we should notice in each legislation. Although the two laws
are quite similar, the CCPA differs from the GDPR in a few important ways:

> - **Impacted businesses**: where businesses of any size must comply with the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Impacted businesses**: Businesses of any size must comply with the
```

  GDPR, the CCPA only impacts businesses that reach a certain size and
  process a certain amount of data from consumers.
- **Penalties**: GDPR penalties are capped based on a company’s annual revenue,
  on the other hand, CCPA penalties have no limit and are assessed per violation

>   and number of affected consumers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  and the number of affected consumers.
```

- **Opt-in/Opt-out**: Under GDPR, businesses must have opt-in from consumers
  before collecting data. In the case of CCPA, consumers must opt-out of data
  collection.
- **Third-party data sales**:  GDPR businesses must have consent from
  customers before any third-party processing or sales its data, while the CCPA
  requires businesses to simply notify the customer of a data sale or transfer,
  with the option to refuse.

In short, both regulations give more power to consumers and enable them to take
action if they want their data to remain private. Besides that, businesses are
required to adhere to their requests.

## Does CCPA apply to my business?

Unbeknownst to some, CCPA doesn’t just apply to businesses based

> physically in California, but any business with customers who reside in the state

Reviewer: ```suggestion
physically in California, but any business with customers who reside in the state.
```

> physically in California, but any business with customers who reside in the state

Reviewer: ```suggestion
physically in California, but any business with customers who reside in the state.
```

  why it is being collected, where it is stored, how secure it is, and who it is being shared with. 
- **Privacy policy**: Update your privacy notices to comply with
  CCPA’s requirements. You can also provide your customers with a **“Do Not Sell My Information** option.
- **Consumer requests**: Establish a system for processing consumer rights requests.
-
- **Train**: Educate your team on how to handle personal information and consumer requests.
- **Security**: Enforce the security of personal information
with risk assessment, and
 an incident response plan.
- **Check Providers**: Evaluate your upstream and downstream contracts with
  third-party service providers and modify the underlying agreements for CCPA
  compliance. Think about your standard data-sharing practices, including
  relationships with data aggregators, data brokers, etc.

## What about CCPA and HIPAA? (case scenario)

Despite its broad scope, CCPA creates certain exemptions designed around HIPAA
and other laws. For example, CCPA does not apply to “Protected Health
Information” (PHI) as defined in HIPAA. This is collected by a covered entity
or business associate.

> CCPA’s HIPAA exemption is desinged to allow covered entities and business

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CCPA’s HIPAA exemption is designed to allow covered entities and business
```

measures to protect your patients' and customers’ information. Now let’s take a
look at some examples where the exemption applies and not.

**Case 1**: Assume that you own a sportswear company that sells products in
California and you have developed a step-counter app that users can download to
their phones through Google Play and App Store. The app tracks the number of
steps a user takes each day and captures additional information, including the
user's name, birthday, weight, calories burned, geolocation, and walking
average. That company is probably not a covered entity or business associate
under HIPAA and would not be able to apply to the CCPA's HIPAA exemption.

**Case 2**: Now consider a health care system "operating" in California that
created an app with the same features as the previous case, yet made the app
available only to its patients to monitor their health and treat medical
conditions. That organization is a covered entity under HIPAA, the data is
probably PHI, and the HIPAA exemption probably applies.

## Final thoughts

Data privacy regulations will demand a lot of work in the preparedness for compliance 

> compliance, but being forced to optimize the data that a company collects,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but being forced to optimize the data that a company collects,
```

processes and stores could create efficiency. Companies need only store the
necessary pieces of personal information to perform their services and reduce
the time and resources (they have spent in the past) to store all of it.
Compliance can be viewed as a company’s competitive advantage by offering
consumers peace of mind that their data is protected and secure.

I believe that CCPA is a powerful law that will be a big win for both consumers
and businesses, and will help to put the United States at the same level as

> Europe with GDPR in the global privacy discussion. This law came to stay and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Europe with GDPR in the global privacy discussion. This law is here to stay and
```

> leverage the rights between consumers and business, giving the former the chance

Reviewer: ```suggestion
leverages the rights between consumers and business, giving the former the chance
```

action if they want their data to remain private. Besides that, businesses are
required to adhere to their requests.

## Does CCPA apply to my business?

Unbeknownst to some, CCPA doesn’t just apply to businesses based
physically in California, but any business with customers who reside in the state

Under the CCPA, businesses must be aware of what is considered private data,
locate and treat customers information in a secure way, even addressing their
vendors to ensure that they are compliant too.

To protect customer’s personal information, businesses need to know what data
they have, where it resides, and how it is processed. In this way, they can set
up the appropriate security measures to be compliant with this regulation.

Companies must realize that the impact of the CCPA is no trivial matter. They
have to begin preparing now to become compliant, if they don’t, they will face
reputation damage, fines, and loss of customer’s trust. Being prepared for this
kind of regulation will bring a smooth path for the future ones that will come and
In other words, it will pay to be compliant, and consumers will value you for it.

> ## How to be prepared for CCPA?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How to be prepared for CCPA
```

> # Consumer Privacy Regulations CCPA and GDPR

Author: yes, totally agree

> # Consumer Privacy Regulations CCPA and GDPR

Author: @andrea-fajardo do you have any suggestions?

> # Consumer Privacy Regulations CCPA and GDPR

Author: I will mark this as solved (here) and discuss it later on the trello board.

> # Consumer Privacy Regulations CCPA and GDPR

Reviewer 2: Let's start to think more about search trends. 
"CCPA compliance" has a huge growth in searches (https://trends.google.com/trends/explore?geo=US&q=GDPR%20CCPA) . "GDPR for dummies" also has many searches. 

Maybe we can name this: GDPR and CCPA Compliance for Dummies

Author: I don't like the "Dummies" part of the title, but is definitely a better option than the original one. Let's see @andrea-fajardo thoughts about this one.

_[Pablo Blanco](https://www.rootstrap.com/blog/author/pabloblancorootstrapcom/)
is a Full-Stack developer on the Rootstrap team and writes about his experience
with ethical hacking and information security. You can also follow Pablo on
[LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/pablo-blanco-a6b5a371/)._

![Data privacy](images/internet-privacy.jpg)

California is considered the world’s 5th biggest economy, ranking higher than

> some European countries. This is not a surprise given it’s home not only to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
some European countries. This is not a surprise as it's home to
```

> Silicon Valley, the world’s premier innovation hub and headquarters of famous

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Silicon Valley, the world’s premier innovation hub and headquarters of several
```

> tech giants, and the entertainment mecca Hollywood, but also to California's

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> Central Valley, one of the most productive agricultural regions on Earth.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> Given numerous data breaches, inappropriate use of customer’s information for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given the numerous data breaches and inappropriate use of customer’s information for
```

> targeted advertising, and other areas of concern such as usage of personal data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
targeted advertising,
```

> for political benefit, there is a growing public concern about misuse of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
there is a growing public concern about the misuse of
```

personal information, security, and privacy. Data privacy regulations are

> becoming a primary element in any data security conversation, from the European

Reviewer: ```suggestion
becoming a primary element in any data security conversation, for 
```

> Union GDPR (2018) to the new ones Brazilian LGPD (2020) and California Consumer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Union GDPR (2018),  Brazilian LGPD (2020), and the California Consumer
```

> Privacy Act (2020), the ability to protect personal information is top of mind.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Privacy Act (2020), the ability to protect personal information is a top priority. 
```

For companies that base their operative around customer data, trust becomes an
essential part of their business model.

In this article, we are going to explore some concepts of the California
Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA), similarities and differences between CCPA and GDPR
regulations, and the impacts generated by these regulations.

## CCPA Overview

> While the GDPR was created to protect citizens of the EU (with a wider impact),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While the GDPR was created to protect citizens of the EU,
```

CCPA is an outcome of the GDPR, changing government priorities, and making them

> more willing to protect individual privacy. Although the CCPA is really new

Reviewer: ```suggestion
more willing to protect individual privacy. Although the CCPA is relatively new
```

> (went into effect on January 1, 2020), it’s important to be aware of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it’s important to be aware of the
```

> policies and processes necessary for compliance and to analyze the current and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
policies and processes necessary for compliance, and
```

> future impact it will have in comparison to GDPR.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the future impact it will have in comparison to GDPR.
```

This California state law establishes new consumer rights relating to the access
of personal information that is held by businesses. The meaning of Personal
information is quite broad, the definition given in
[CCPA](https://oag.ca.gov/privacy/) says:

_Personal information is information that identifies, relates to, or could
reasonably be linked with an individual or household._

> Some examples of that are customer name, social security number, email address,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some examples of that are customer names, social security numbers, email addresses,
```

> phone number, records of products purchased, internet browsing history

Reviewer: ```suggestion
internet browsing history,
```

> (including cookies), geolocation data, fingerprints, IP and MAC address (or any

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 geolocation data, fingerprints, IP addresses, etc.
```

> device identifier), among others. Personal information does not include publicly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Personal information does not include publicly
```

available information from federal, state, or local government records.

Businesses have a track record of using personal information to benefit their

> agenda, CCPA will serve to protect California consumer rights and encourage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
agenda and the CCPA  serves to protect California consumer rights and encourage
```

> stronger privacy, traceability, and greater transparency overall. CCPA allows

Reviewer: ```suggestion
stronger privacy, traceability, and transparency. The CCPA allows
```

> consumers to have control, ownership, gain security over their personal

Reviewer: ```suggestion
consumers to have control, ownership, and gain security over their personal
```

> information, and also the ability to request that any business disclose (and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
information.  They also allow for the request that any business disclose
```

> delete) the personal information collected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and if necessary delete any personal information collected.
```

This data protection gives consumers the right to:

> - Know what personal information is being collected

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Know what personal information is collected
```

> - Access the personal information that is collected, and request its deletion

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Access to and option to delete any personal information.
```

> - Know if their personal information is being shared, and if so, with whom

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Knowledge of who their personal information is being shared with
```

  opt-out of the sale of their personal information
- Have equal service and price, whether or not they choose to exercise their
  privacy rights (right to non-discrimination).

It’s also prohibited selling the personal information of consumers ages 13–16
(unless the consumer opts-in). For consumers under the age of 13, consent from a
parent is a must.

> ## Who does the CCPA apply to?

Reviewer 2: Remove "the"

CCPA defines a business as a for-profit entity that collects consumer personal
data and applies to all companies that serve California residents, whether they

> are physically placed in California or not. If the company meets at least one of
> the following thresholds, may be subject to compliance:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
are physically placed in California or not. The company may be subject to compliance if it meets at least one of the following thresholds:
```

wdyt?

- Companies with at least \$25 million in annual revenue (applies to total
  revenue, not just revenue in California).
- Companies that annually buy, sell, receive, or share personal information of
  at least 50,000 consumers, homes, or devices for commercial purposes.
- Companies that derive 50% or more of their annual revenue from the sale of
  personal information.

> ## Some differences between CCPA and GDPR

Reviewer 2: CCPA vs GDPR: What are the differences?

The European General Data Protection Regulation is an evolution of the EU’s
existing data rules and replaced the Data Protection Directive (DPD). It

> addresses many of the lacks in the DPD, including adding requirements for

Reviewer 3: `lacks` sound a little weird in plural, what about `deficiencies`, `weaknesses`?

documenting IT procedures, performing risk assessments under certain conditions,
notifying the consumer and authorities when there is a breach, and strengthening
rules for data minimization.

The GDPR protects similar private data as the CCPA and recommends that companies
provide a “reasonable” level of protection for personal information. It also
mandates that the business explains to the customer how their information will
be used and to explicitly ask for their permission to collect and process it.

No matter how influenced the CCPA may have been by the GDPR, there are some
clear differences we should notice in each legislation. Although the two laws
are quite similar, the CCPA differs from the GDPR in a few important ways:

> - **Business impacted**: whereas businesses of any size must comply with the

Reviewer 2: Impacted businesses instead of Business Impacted

>   GDPR, the CCPA only impacts businesses that reach a certain size that
>   processes a certain amount of data from consumers.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  GDPR, the CCPA only impacts businesses that reach a certain size and/or that
  process a certain amount of data from consumers.
```
Seems to be something missing from that sentence, could an `and` or `or` make it right?

- **Penalties**: GDPR penalties are capped based on a company’s annual revenue,
  on the other hand, CCPA penalties have no limit and are assessed per violation
  and number of affected consumers.
- **Opt-in/Opt-out**: under GDPR, businesses must have opt-in from consumers
  before collecting data, in the case of CCPA, consumers must opt-out of data
  collection.

> - **Third-party data sales**: for GDPR businesses must have consent from
>   customers before any third-party processing or sales its data, while the CCPA

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Third-party data sales**: for GDPR businesses must have consent from
  customers before any third-party processing or selling its data, while the CCPA
```

  requires businesses to simply notify the customer of a data sale or transfer
  and allow them to refuse.

In short, both regulations give more power to consumers and enable them to take
action if they want their data to remain private, besides that, businesses are
required to attend their requests.

## Does CCPA apply to my business?

> Contrary to what some believe, CCPA doesn’t just apply to those businesses based

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Contrary to what some believe, CCPA doesn’t just apply to those businesses based
```
```suggestion
Unbeknownst to some, CCPA doesn’t just apply to businesses based
```

> within California, rather than that any business with customers in California

Reviewer: ```suggestion
physically in California, but any business with customers who reside in the state
```

> within California, rather than that any business with customers in California

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in California, but businesses with customers who reside in California should that business meet the above-mentioned criteria. 
```

> can be affected if that business meets the criteria mentioned above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Under the CCPA, businesses must be aware of what is considered private data,
locate and treat customers information in a secure way, even addressing their
vendors to ensure that they are compliant too.

To protect customer’s personal information, businesses need to know what data
they have, where it resides, and how it is processed. In this way, they can set
up the appropriate security measures to be compliant with this regulation.

Companies must realize that the impact of the CCPA is no trivial matter. They
have to begin preparing now to become compliant, if they don’t, they will face
reputation damage, fines, and loss of customer’s trust. Being prepared for this

> kind of regulation will bring a smooth path for the futures ones will come and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
kind of regulation will bring a smooth path for the future ones that will come and
```

> will open new business opportunities and process improvements, in other words,
> It will pay to be compliant, and consumers will value you for it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
will open new business opportunities and process improvements, in other words,
it will pay to be compliant, and consumers will value you for it.
```

## How to be prepared for CCPA?

As soon as you know that your business is subject to CCPA, you can start working
to be compliant, the following steps can be useful in the way to get ready:

- **Roadmap**: create a plan to achieve compliance with CCPA.
- **Learn**: know your obligations and be aware of changing requirements.
- **Data Map**: identify what personal information you collect from customers,

>   why is being collected, where it is stored, how secure this information is,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  why it is being collected, where it is stored, how secure this information is,
```

>   and with whom is being shared.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  and with whom it is being shared.
```

- **Privacy policy**: update your privacy notices to be sure you comply with

>   CCPA’s requirements. Provide to your customers with a “Do Not Sell My
>   Information” to allow them to opt-out of the sale of their personal
>   information.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  CCPA’s requirements. Provide your customers with a “Do Not Sell My
  Information” notice to allow them to opt-out of the sale of their personal
  information.
```
I'm not sure if `notice` was what you meant, but something was missing there.

  requests.
- **Security**: enforce the security of personal information to avoid breaches
  and security incidents, make a risk assessment, and be sure to have an
  incident response plan.
- **Check providers**: evaluate your upstream and downstream contracts with
  third-party service providers and modify the underlying agreements for CCPA
  compliance. Think about your standard data-sharing practices, including
  relationships with data aggregators, data brokers, etc.

## What about CCPA and HIPAA? (case scenario)

Despite its broad scope, CCPA creates certain exemptions designed around HIPAA
and other laws. For example, CCPA does not apply to “Protected Health
Information” (PHI) as defined in HIPAA, which is collected by a covered entity
or business associate.

CCPA’s HIPAA exemption is meant to allow covered entities and business
associates to continue following the privacy regulations laid out in HIPAA
without interference from an additional law. CCPA exempts an organization that
“maintains patient information in the same manner” as PHI under HIPAA.

Healthcare providers and insurance agents may assume that the law’s HIPAA

> exemption will cover PHI and other customer information. So we have good news,
> If your business is HIPAA compliant, you are not required to apply extra

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
exemption will cover PHI and other customer information. So we have good news,
if your business is HIPAA compliant, you are not required to apply extra
```

> If your business is HIPAA compliant, you are not required to apply extra

Reviewer: ```suggestion
if your business is HIPAA compliant, you are not required to apply extra
```

> measures to protect your patient’s and customers’ information. Now let’s take a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
measures to protect your patients' and customers’ information. Now let’s take a
```

look at some examples where the exemption applies and not.

**Case 1**: Assume that you own a sportswear company that sells products in
California and you have developed a step-counter app that users can download to
their phones through Google Play and App Store. The app tracks the number of
steps a user takes each day and captures additional information, including the
user's name, birthday, weight, calories burned, geolocation, and walking
average. That company is probably not a covered entity or business associate
under HIPAA and would not be able to apply to the CCPA's HIPAA exemption.

**Case 2**: Now consider a health care system "operating" in California that
created an app with the same features as the previous case, yet made the app
available only to its patients to monitor their health and treat medical
conditions. That organization is a covered entity under HIPAA, the data is
probably PHI, and the HIPAA exemption probably applies.

> ## Summary

Reviewer 2: Final thoughts

> Data privacy regulations will demand a lot of work in the preparedness to be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Data privacy regulations will demand a lot of work in the preparedness for compliance 
```

> Data privacy regulations will demand a lot of work to get ready compliance, but

Reviewer 2: "get ready compliance" sounds weird

> compliance, but being forced to optimizing the data that a company collects,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
compliance, but being forced to optimize the data that a company collects,
```

stores could create efficiency. Companies need only store the necessary pieces
of personal information to perform their services and reduce the time and
resources (they have spent in the past) to store all of it. Compliance can be
viewed as a company’s competitive advantage by offering consumers peace of mind
that their data is protected and secure.

I believe that CCPA is a powerful law that will be a big win for both consumers
and businesses, and will help to put the United States at the same level as
Europe with GDPR in the global privacy discussion. This law came to stay and

> leverage the rights between consumers and business, giving to the first ones,
> the chance to know what a company knows about them, decide whether or not they

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
leverage the rights between consumers and business, giving the former
the chance to know what a company knows about them, decide whether or not they
```

that information, and prevent them from selling it.

> Governments are beginning to take data privacy very seriously. Like in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Governments are beginning to take data privacy very seriously. For example, 
```

> European Union, Brazil, India, Japan, and other countries, the CCPA will have

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the European Union, Brazil, India, Japan, and other countries, the CCPA will have
```

> far-more impacts across state jurisdictions, reaching companies around the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
far more impacts across state jurisdictions, reaching companies around the
```

> far more impacts across state jurisdictions, reaching companies around the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
far more impact across state jurisdictions, reaching companies around the
```

> world. Getting prepared to be compliant it’s important and will save your

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
world. Getting prepared to be compliant is important and will save your
```

> world. Getting prepared to be compliant is important and will save your company

Reviewer: ```suggestion
world. Achieving compliance is important and will save your company
```

> company a lot of money, time, and reputation. Be compliant with these

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
company a lot of money, time, and reputation. To be compliant with these
```

> a lot of money, time, and reputation. To be compliant with these regulations can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
money, time, and a potentially negative reputation. To comply with these regulations can 
```

> be a hard work to achieve, you need to be able to identify content related to a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be hard work, and you need to be able to identify content related
```

> data subject, classify and protect consumer data, and sometimes even delete upon

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to the data subject, classify and protect consumer data, and sometimes even delete upon
```

> data subject, classify and protect consumer data, and sometimes even delete upon

Reviewer: ```suggestion
data subjects, classify and protect consumer data, and at times delete upon
```

> sometimes even delete upon request. But there is some light at the end, if you

Reviewer 3: `at the end of the tunnel`?

> request. But there is some light at the end of the tunnel, if you get your

Reviewer 4: This last paragraph feels somewhat redundant, how about sth like:
'The upside of this effort is gaining a competitive advantage, both in the present and looking ahead at future regulations on the horizon'.

> request. But there is some light at the end of the tunnel, if you get your

Reviewer: ```suggestion
request. But there is light at the end of the tunnel if you get your
```
